---
layout: post
title:  "Tooling"
date:   2022-05-12 17:00:00 +0200
---



This first post revolves around hardware and virtualization principles.

# Hardware

Not every computer is created equal. Neither is every OS. I began my IT path on a Macbook Air from 2014 with 8 GB of RAM. While this is enormous compared to the [Appolo Guidance Computer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_Guidance_Computer), it is not enough for modern-day software development. Tools like Visual Studio and most of Jetbrains products will make your machines sweat. Faced with the conundrum of limited resources, the IT student has two options: (a) beef up his/her hardware or (b) outsource resource-intensive tasks to stronger machines. I suggest to do both.

My experience is that the limiting factors are RAM and I/O speed to disk. Most people I have seen program on laptops, so let's focus on this scenario. A few exceptions aside - like the [Framework](https://frame.work/de/en) products -  laptops are not particularly modular, meaning extensible. If you make a mistake on your purchase, you will have a tough time correcting the shot. This makes it all the more important to identify the purchasing criteria.

## Keep your options open

You want to acquire hardware components with easily accessible open-source drivers. You may at some point want to install Linux and it is preferable to anticipate on that. Nothing more frustrating than having to compile GPU or wifi drivers from source. This issue is less acute then it used to be. However, do check that the components are "supported" under Linux.

## Memory over compute

In a world of high-end videogames and crypto-mining, a lot of ink has been spent on computing power. As I have said, faced with a limited budget, prefer more RAM and/or a better hard drive than more CPUs/cores. In general programming - which today is web programming - you will have to run multiple tools in parallel: IDE, web browser, terminal, virtual machines,... This quickly adds up. 

My preference is to go with a well-established OEM and to buy their second-range products. With Dell for instance, this means not following the XPS bandwagon but focus on the Inspiron/Vostro line. Choose a model with minimum RAM. The reason is that laptops usually come with two RAM slots, one of which is often soldered on the motherboard. This means that only one slot will accept additional RAM. I have found it cheaper to acquire RAM from a third-party and upgrade the laptop myself. 

I/O is another limiting factor. Try to get hardware with a M.2 NVMe SSD. These provide the best performances. Such SSDs are very useful to run virtual machines from. 

# Virtualization

Talking about virtual machines 